The stability of ferroelectric phase in GeTe thin films

ABSTRACT
========

The evolution of ferroelectric Curie temperatures of GeTe thin films on decrease
of film thickness has been studied using variable-temperature Raman measurements
and first principles calculations. Using variable-temperature Raman spectroscopy
enables measuring Tc in films down to 3nm, and the change of film thickness from
100nm to 3nm leads to no obvious Tc decrease. Further first principles
calculations reveal that the existence of intrinsic Ge vacancies in GeTe could
cancel depolarization field and maintain high Tc of ultrathin GeTe films. The
unique high Tc property in ultrathin films makes GeTe a promising material in
high density ferroelectric and multifunctional devices.

I.INTRODUCTION 
===============

With the rapid scaling down of electronic devices, the demand of ultrathin
ferroelectric films which have promising applications in a wide range including
ferroelectric memories1,2, sensors3,4 and actuators5,6 is increasing, too. For
the retain of ferroelectricity in ultrathin films, a critical effect has to be
considered is depolarization field7, strength of which increases quickly as the
ferroelectric film gets thinner, resulting in ferroelectricity disappearance8 by
cancelling the spontaneous polarization. For typical insulating ferroelectric
materials, such as BaTiO38,9, the strength of depolarization field can reach
108V/m even with the screen charges provided by electrodes, thus inhibiting the
miniaturization of ferroelectric devices.

GeTe，which has been widely studied as an important member of phase change
materials10,11 (PCM), is also a known diatomic ferroelectric that exhibits a
ferroelectric-to-paraelectric transition at a Curie temperature(Tc) of
705K(432℃)in bulk phase12. Using conventional technologies such as Sawyer-Tower
electric circuits to measure hysteresis loop of GeTe is not easy, because the
carrier concentration in GeTe is very high (\~1020 cm-3) due to intrinsic Ge
vacancies13,14, which would screen external electric field and makes the
polarization reversal difficult. Nevertheless, the ferroelectric domain
structure and switching behavior have been studied with the help of new
technologies such as piezoresponse force microscopy15-18(PFM) and in situ TEM19.
Recently, with the discovery of giant Rashba effect in bulk GeTe and its
correlation to ferroelectricity20, GeTe has attracted a lot of attention in
Ferro-Electric Rashba Semi-Conductors (FERSC) field21-24. Comparing to BaTiO3,
the depolarization field in which has to be screened(incomplete) by proper
electrodes, the high carrier concentration in GeTe could provide enough charges
to screen depolarization field, making the retain of room temperature
ferroelectric instability in ultrathin films easier.

Ferroelectric GeTe has a rhombohedral structure(R3M), which is also known as
distort rocksalt. The bulk phase Curie temperature of this material can be
confirmed by capacitance-temperature measurements and variable-temperature XRD.
But for ultrathin films, these technologies are not easy to perform.
Variable-temperature Raman has been widely used in conforming Curie temperatures
of ferroelectric ultrathin films25,26, and this technology could provide
distinguishable signal intensity for GeTe ultrathin films. Furthermore, Raman
light is transparent for (ZnS)0.85(SiO2)0.15 in range we are interested, which
allows us to add a (ZnS)0.85(SiO2)0.15 protective layer to prevent Te
sublimation at high temperature27,28, thus achieving a reliable ferroelectric
transition temperature. To our knowledge, the Curie temperature of GeTe
ultrathin film has been reported rarely in literature。

In this paper，we perform variable-temperature Raman measurements on GeTe thin
films of different thickness. After data processing, the films' Tc of different
thickness could be obtained. Further DFT calculations have been performed to
elucidate the influence of intrinsic Ge vacancies on Tc of GeTe thin films.

**II.EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS** 
============================

GeTe thin films of different thickness（100nm/10nm/7nm/5nm/3nm）are deposited on
Si(001) substrates covered by 1μm thermal SiO2. A 20nm (ZnS)0.85(SiO2)0.15 layer
is deposited on GeTe films as a protective layer. This transparent protective
layer could prevent the Te sublimation at high temperature, which is crucial for
obtaining reliable Curie temperatures. Covered GeTe films are then annealed at a
relatively high temperature of 400℃ for 20 min to obtain a fully crystalline
phase.

Raman spectra are recorded by the Olympus B×41 microscope equipped with a cooled
charge-coupled device of 1024\*256 pixels and an Nd-YAG laser at a wavelength of
532 nm. The spot size of incident laser beam is \~1μm, the power density from a
100 objective lens is kept at a low value of 3 mW and the laser exposure time is
fixed at 10 s for each measurement. The spectral resolution for the recorded
Stokes side Raman spectra was set to ∼2 cm−1 The sample temperature is
controlled using a hot stage Linkam with the accuracy of 1 K.

To figure out the effect of charge carriers on the ferroelectric instability of
GeTe, we performed density functional theory (DFT) within the generalized
gradient approximation(GGA)29, implemented in the Vienna *ab initio* Simulation
Package (VASP)30. All results were obtained using the projector-augmented
plane-wave(PAW)31 method, including valence electrons of Ge 4s24p2 and Te
5s25p4. Our calculations do not include spin-orbit corrections. Brillouin zone
integrations are performed with a Gaussian broadening of 0.02 eV during all
relaxations. These calculations are performed with a 5×5×1 Monkhorst–Pack
k-point mesh and a 500 eV plane-wave cutoff.

**III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION** 
================================

Room temperature Raman spectra of GeTe thin films in different thickness are
shown in Fig.1. Two dominant Raman peaks are observed at about 90 (labeled band
A) and 130 cm-1 (labeled band B) for crystalline GeTe thin films, corresponding
to optical phonon modes Γ3(E) and Γ1(A1), respectively. These results are
similar to previous experiments and group theoretical analysis32-34.

According to the fact that temperature variation would affect scattering
process, thus affecting the relative intensities of the vibrational lines in a
Raman spectrum, we use the so-called *reduced representation* to exclude the
influence of temperature before Tc determination. Reduced Raman scattering
intensities($$I_{\text{red}}$$) are connected to experimentally
ones($$I_{\exp}$$) through following equation35-37:

$$
I_{\text{red}}(v) = \left( v_{0} - v \right)^{- 4}v\left\lbrack n\left( v,T \right) + 1 \right\rbrack^{- 1}\ I_{\exp}(v)
$$

where $$n\left( v,T \right) = {\lbrack exp(\frac{\hslash v*2\pi c}{k_{B}T}) -
1\rbrack}^{- 1}$$ is the Bose–Einstein factor, representing mean phonon number
at temperature T, $$\hslash$$ and $$k_{B}$$ are the Plank and Boltzman
constants, respectively. The character c denotes the speed of light, $$v$$ is
Raman shift in m-1, $$v_{0}$$ is the wavenumber of incident radiation, the
fourth power term is used to correct the wave length dependence of the scattered
intensity.

Fig.2(a) shows the reduced Raman spectra of 3nm GeTe thin films at different
temperatures range from 25℃ to 410℃. Temperature evolution of Raman spectra
allows Tc to be measured, based on the fact that centrosymmetric crystals have
no first-order Raman active modes. As the temperature approach to Tc, the Raman
intensity will decrease to zero. The reduced Raman intensities of two main
phonon modes at different temperatures are plotted in Fig.2(b), shown in blue
and red triangles, respectively. For simplicity, the intensities are divided by
intensity of corresponding mode at 25℃，called normalized Raman intensity. The
dashed line is linear fit to the average of the two modes, from which we could
extrapolate that the phase transition temperature of 3nm GeTe thin film is about
520℃.

The same process has been performed on GeTe thin films of different thickness
range from 100 to 3nm. Fig.3 summarizes the Tcs of different GeTe films. The Tc
we obtained of 100nm films is about 400℃(673K), which is very close to
literature results12,16. As the film thickness decreases to 3nm, the Tc of GeTe
increases from 400℃ to 520℃, remaining far above room temperature in all
thickness measured. This is very different from conventional ferroelectric
insulators, the Tc of which decrease to below room temperature quickly as film
thickness down to nm scale.

The reason of obvious Tc decrease at nm scale for insulating ferroelectric thin
films is the rapid increase of depolarization field strength inside of thin
films, which will decrease polarization and turns non-centrosymmetrical
ferroelectric phase to centrosymmetrical paraelectric phase. To obtain stable
ferroelectric phase in ultrathin films, the metal-ferroelectric-metal(MFM)
sandwich structure has been widely adopted38-40. After choosing proper
electrodes in MFM structure, the depolarization field could be screened by free
carriers provided by metal electrode. But this screen is usually not complete41,
resulting in remain depolarization field, and the choose of electrode is not an
easy process42,43.

On the other hand, for GeTe, there are a lot of intrinsic carriers which might
cancel internal depolarization field. Researchers have compared high conducting
GeTe with strongly insulating BaTiO3 nanocrystals44, their results show that
dipole correlations in BaTiO3 decline quickly compare to GeTe as nanoparticle
diameter decreases (to about 8nm). In other words, the ferroelectric phase is
much more stable in GeTe nanoparticles than BaTiO3 at the same size. Researchers
speculate that strong internal screening of the polarization in high conductive
GeTe would result in maximal compensation of depolarization effects，which plays
an important role in preserve ferroelectric order at finite dimensions. But in
nanocrystals, surface facets and internal strains also affect the ferroelectric
instability. Thin films might be more suitable for investigating the influence
of free carriers on Tc.

To further elucidate the influence of free carriers on GeTe ultrathin films’
ferroelectric instability, first-principle calculations have been performed. We
built a slab containing 9 buckled Ge-Te layers along (111) direction to simulate
a GeTe ultrathin film. A 20Å vacuum layer along (111) ensures that no
interaction occurs between adjacent slab. To introduce vacancies, we make a 3×3
supercell along x and y axis. As has been adopted intensely45-47, a Ge atom is
deleted to produce a vacancy in the center of supercell, the position of which
is circled in Fig.4(b). The planar average and macroscopic average potential
along (111) of GeTe 9-layer model with and without vacancy have been calculated.
After structure relaxation, a further static calculation gives us the potential
attribution as shown in Fig.4. From Fig.4, the GeTe thin film without vacancy
shows an obvious depolarization field, the strength is about 3.14×108V/m. Inside
of thin film with Ge vacancies, the depolarization field strength is greatly
minimized compared to the no vacancy case. The volume of 9-layer 3×3 supercell
is 4.95×10-21 cm-3, so the vacancy concentration of GeTe thin film calculated
here is 2.02×1020 cm-3, which could give a carrier concentration in agreement
with experiment results48,49. From the calculation above, we could conclude that
the existence of intrinsic Ge vacancies produces a lot of carrier charges inside
of GeTe thin films, these carrier charges move to two end of films under the
influence of depolarization field, in turn cancelling the field, keeping GeTe in
non-centrosymmetrical ferroelectric phase even in ultrathin films.

IV. CONCLUSIONS
===============

In conclusion, we have performed variable-temperature Raman measurement on GeTe
thin films of different thickness to obtain their ferroelectric Curie
temperature. The results show the Curie temperature of GeTe thin films could
maintain far above room temperature even in film as thin as 3nm. Our DFT
simulations show that intrinsic Ge vacancies inside of GeTe play an important
role in cancelling depolarization field and thus maintaining ferroelectric
phase. We suggest that the unique ferroelectric instability in ultrathin film of
GeTe and similar high conductive ferroelectric materials may have significant
applications in low dimension ferroelectric devices, especially considering that
GeTe is a well-known phase change material, which gives the possibility to
design new multifunctional devices with high density and combine memory and
ferroelectricity.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
===============

References
==========

1 Scott JF, Science. **315** (5814), 954 (2007).

2 Alexey Lipatov, Pankaj Sharma, Alexei Gruverman, and Alexander Sinitskii, ACS
Nano **9** (8), 8089 (2015).

3 M Zirkl, A Sawatdee, U Helbig, M Krause, G Scheipl, E Kraker, P. A. Ersman, D
Nilsson, D Platt, and P Bodö, Advanced materials **23** (18), 2069 (2011).

4 Daisuke Akai, presented at the Nanoelectronics Conference, 2016.

5 P Muralt, Journal of Micromechanics & Microengineering **10** (2), 136 (2000).

6 William P. Robbins, Integrated Ferroelectrics **11** (11), 179 (2015).

7 R. R. Mehta, Journal of Applied Physics **44** (8), 3379 (1973).

8 Javier Junquera and Philippe Ghosez, Nature **422** (6931), 506 (2003).

9 Meng Qiu Cai, Yue Zheng, Pui Wai Ma, and C. H Woo, Journal of Applied Physics
**109** (2), 81 (2011).

10 Ping Ma, Hao Tong, Ting Huang, Ming Xu, Niannian Yu, Xiaomin Cheng, Chengjun
Sun, and Xiangshui Miao, Journal of Physical Chemistry C **121** (2) (2016).

11 A. V. Kolobov, P. Fons, A. I. Frenkel, A. L. Ankudinov, J. Tominaga, and T.
Uruga, Nature materials **3** (10), 703 (2004).

12 T Chattopadhyay and JX Boucherle, Journal of Physics C: Solid State Physics
**20** (10), 1431 (1987).

13 F. Tong, X. S. Miao, Y. Wu, Z. P. Chen, H. Tong, and X. M. Cheng, Applied
Physics Letters **97** (26), 261904 (2010).

14 Arthur H. Edwards, Andrew C. Pineda, Peter A. Schultz, Marcus G. Martin, and
Cyrus J. Umrigar, Physical Review B **73** (4), 045210 (2005).

15 A. V. Kolobov, D. J. Kim, A. Giussani, P. Fons, J. Tominaga, R. Calarco, and
A. Gruverman, APL Materials **2** (6), 066101 (2014).

16 J. J. Gervacio-Arciniega, E. Prokhorov, F. J. Espinoza-Beltrán, and G.
Trapaga, Journal of Applied Physics **112** (5), 052018 (2012).

17 J. J. Gervacio Arciniega, E. Prokhorov, F. J. Espinoza Beltran, and J.
Gonzalez-Hernandez, Applied Physics Letters **97** (6), 063504 (2010).

18 Engin Durgun, Ph Ghosez, R Shaltaf, Xavier Gonze, and J-Y Raty, Physical
review letters **103** (24), 247601 (2009).

19 P. Nukala, M. Ren, R. Agarwal, J. Berger, G. Liu, A. T. Johnson, and R.
Agarwal, Nature communications **8**, 15033 (2017).

20 D. Di Sante, P. Barone, R. Bertacco, and S. Picozzi, Advanced materials
**25** (4), 509 (2013).

21 Silvia Picozzi, Frontiers in Condensed Matter Physics (2013).

22 M. Liebmann, C. Rinaldi, D. Di Sante, J. Kellner, C. Pauly, R. N. Wang, J. E.
Boschker, A. Giussani, S. Bertoli, M. Cantoni, L. Baldrati, M. Asa, I. Vobornik,
G. Panaccione, D. Marchenko, J. Sanchez-Barriga, O. Rader, R. Calarco, S.
Picozzi, R. Bertacco, and M. Morgenstern, Advanced materials **28** (3), 560
(2016).

23 J. Krempaský, S. Muff, F. Bisti, M. Fanciulli, H. Volfová, A. P. Weber, N.
Pilet, P. Warnicke, H. Ebert, and J. Braun, Nat Commun **7** (2016).

24 C. Rinaldi, S. Varotto, M. Asa, J. Slawinska, J. Fujii, G. Vinai, S. Cecchi,
R. Calarco, I. Vobornik, and G. Panaccione, Nano letters (2017).

25 D. A. Tenne, P. Turner, J. D. Schmidt, M. Biegalski, Y. L. Li, L. Q. Chen, A.
Soukiassian, S. Trolier-McKinstry, D. G. Schlom, X. X. Xi, D. D. Fong, P. H.
Fuoss, J. A. Eastman, G. B. Stephenson, C. Thompson, and S. K. Streiffer, Phys
Rev Lett **103** (17), 177601 (2009).

26 Dmitri Tenne, Science **313** (5793), 1614 (2006).

27 E. F Steigmeier and G. Harbeke, Solid State Commun **8** (16), 1275 (1970).

28 Paul Fons, Alexander V. Kolobov, Milos Krbal, Junji Tominaga, K. S.
Andrikopoulos, S. N. Yannopoulos, G. A. Voyiatzis, and T. Uruga, Physical Review
B **82** (15) (2010).

29 John P Perdew, Kieron Burke, and Matthias Ernzerhof, (1996).

30 G. Kresse and D. Joubert, Physical Review B Condensed Matter **59** (3), 1758
(1999).

31 Pe Blochl, E Blöchl, and P. E Blöchl, (1994).

32 M. J. Polking, J. J. Urban, D. J. Milliron, H. Zheng, E. Chan, M. A.
Caldwell, S. Raoux, C. F. Kisielowski, J. W. Ager, R. Ramesh, and A. P.
Alivisatos, Nano letters **11** (3), 1147 (2011).

33 N. N. Yu, H. Tong, and X. S. Miao, Applied Physics Letters **105** (12),
121902 (2014).

34 S N Yannopoulos, G A Voyiatzis, A V Kolobov, and M. Ribes, **18** (3), págs.
965 (2006).

35 F. L Galeener and P. N Sen, Physical Review B **17** (4), 1928 (1978).

36 Eric C. Le Ru and Pablo G. Etchegoin, *Principles of Surface-Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy*. (Elsevier, 2009), pp.655.

37 K. S. Andrikopoulos, S. N. Yannopoulos, G. A. Voyiatzis, A. V. Kolobov, M.
Ribes, and J. Tominaga, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter **18** (3), 965
(2006).

38 A Gruverman and A Kholkin, Reports on Progress in Physics **69** (8), 2443
(2006).

39 S. K. Pandey, A. R. James, R. Raman, S. N. Chatterjee, Anshu Goyal, Chandra
Prakash, and T. C. Goel, Physica B Physics of Condensed Matter **369** (1), 135
(2005).

40 Lucian D. Filip, Lucian Pintilie, Wing Shan Tam, and Chi Wah Kok, presented
at the International Symposium on Next-Generation Electronics, 2016.

41 S. Farokhipoor and B. Noheda, APL Materials **2** (5), 056102 (2014).

42 Lucian Pintilie, Ionela Vrejoiu, Dietrich Hesse, and Marin Alexe, Journal of
Applied Physics **104** (11), 114101 (2008).

43 Ji-Hee Yang, Da-Jeong Yun, Gi-Ho Seo, Seong-Min Kim, Myung-Han Yoon, and
Sung-Min Yoon, Japanese Journal of Applied Physics **57** (3S1), 03DB02 (2018).

44 M. J. Polking, M. G. Han, A. Yourdkhani, V. Petkov, C. F. Kisielowski, V. V.
Volkov, Y. Zhu, G. Caruntu, A. P. Alivisatos, and R. Ramesh, Nature materials
**11** (8), 700 (2012).

45 Arthur H. Edwards, Andrew C. Pineda, Peter A. Schultz, Marcus G. Martin,
Aidan P. Thompson, and Harold P. Hjalmarson, Journal of Physics Condensed Matter
**17** (32), L329 (2005).

46 Volker L. Deringer, Marck Lumeij, Ralf P. Stoffel, and Richard Dronskowski,
Chemistry of Materials **25** (11), 2220 (2013).

47 W. Zhang, M Wuttig, and R Mazzarello, Sci Rep **5**, 13496 (2015).

48 W. Zhang, A. Thiess, P. Zalden, R. Zeller, P. H. Dederichs, Jy. Raty, M.
Wuttig, S. Blügel, and R. Mazzarello, Nat Mater **11** (11), 952 (2012).

49 Y. Fukuma, H. Asada, S. Miyawaki, T. Koyanagi, S. Senba, K. Goto, and H.
Sato, Applied Physics Letters **93** (25), 252502 (2008).

Figures and legends
===================

![E:\\System\\Desktop\\信息存储\\0研究生规划\\学习资料\\博三上\\文章\\fig\\Fig1-all-2.jpg](file:E:/System\\Desktop\\信息存储\\0研究生规划\\学习资料\\博三上\\文章\\fig\\Fig1-all-2.jpg)

**Fig.1 Room Temperature Raman spectra of different thickness GeTe films.**

![E:\\System\\Desktop\\信息存储\\0研究生规划\\学习资料\\博三上\\文章\\fig\\fig2-s1.jpg](E:/System/Desktop/信息存储/0研究生规划/学习资料/博三上/文章/fig/fig2-s1.jpg)

**Fig.2 Temperature evolution of 3nm GeTe thin film’s Raman spectra.** a)
Reduced Raman Intensity of 3nm GeTe film under different Temperatures. b)
Normalized Raman Intensity of two main photon modes, peaks at about 100cm-1
relate to Γ3(E) and peaks at about 130cm-1 and 140cm-1 relate to Γ1(A1), their
intensity are shown in blue and red triangles, respectively. The dashed line is
linear fit to the average intensity of the two modes.

![E:\\System\\Desktop\\信息存储\\0研究生规划\\学习资料\\博三上\\文章\\fig\\fig3-s.jpg](media/008f618b89b62f45f0ffead575344af5.jpg)

**Fig.3 Tc as a function of GeTe film thickness.**

![E:\\System\\Desktop\\信息存储\\0研究生规划\\学习资料\\博三上\\文章\\fig\\fig4-222.jpg](media/6367964f0afec1f8f20e68eb53651bbd.jpg)

**Fig.4 planar average and macroscopic average potential of GeTe thin films**.
a) upper part is the model of GeTe thin film without vacancy, lower is the curve
of potential vs planar distance. b) upper part is the model of GeTe thin film
with vacancy, lower is the curve of potential vs planar distance.
